Now it's rolling. So let us commence without further ado. Would you please give
us a little bit of your background, how you grew up, how you got interested in
science fiction, and why you write science fiction now? Well, actually, I
started reading science fiction kind of late compared to a lot of people because
when I was growing up, well, I didn't know very much about science fiction. I'd
never read any of it to speak of, and about the first science fiction I ever
read in depth was H.G. Wells, which I was reading because I was interested in
him, and I was also interested in writing a paper on him for a class I was
taking in high school. So that was what got me started, and it wasn't until I
was in college that I really started reading a lot of science fiction and really
found out how many writers there were. I thought that basically there was Aldous
Huxley or H.G. Wells and a few writers who would sort of do a science fictional
or utopian or satirical kind of book, and I didn't really know about any of the
other stuff until a lot later.
So I don't know if that answers your question. Yeah, that answers it fine. What
is your definition of science fiction? I don't really have one. I mean, I think
it's pretty obvious what it is when you look at it, that it deals with times
other than the here and now, usually things in the future or in an alternate
world or whatever. But I get very annoyed and very impatient with definitions
anyway. Unfortunately, I think a lot of what defines science fiction is that
it's a publisher's category. Basically, the publishers are saying, well, this is
science fiction, we'll publish it as science fiction. It's a publisher's
category. And I don't think writers really think of it quite as much as the
publishers do. I think most writers would probably rather that the books were
just thought of as novels that just happened to be a little more distant from
present-day life than other kinds of books.
Your background is in philosophy. Yeah. Was that a good discipline from which to
write science fiction? Probably. But I think that almost anything would be a
good discipline from which to write science fiction, or anything else, probably.
I think what's useful about philosophy is that... I think... Oh, jeez, I'm
stuttering. Maybe I better start this over again. Yeah, go right ahead. Okay. I
think the best thing about philosophy as a training is that it teaches you to
sort out reasonable sorts of ideas or consistent sorts of ideas from things that
are just completely bizarre or ridiculous. That's probably one of the best
things about it. And it's also the kind of thing that I don't think you can
study for very long unless you become interested in other things. Now, I know a
lot of people nowadays who probably disagree with that because the trend in
philosophy has been towards the analytic school and the sort of thing that has
almost no relation to anything, symbolic logic and that sort of thing, where it
becomes very, very abstract. That's been the trend. I was always sort of at odds
with that because my interest was more in the history of philosophy and, in
particular, in ancient philosophy. I was taking Greek so that I could read the
stuff properly, and I was a lot more interested in that kind of thing. That's
not the general trend of modern-day philosophy at all, But that was my interest,
and that particular kind of thing I think is probably useful. At least I learned
how to do a lot of research because the kind of thing I was doing I had to, and
it's always useful to know how to do research for writing science fiction. A
number of your works have biological themes as well as the anthologies you've
edited. Do you have a latent interest in biology? Well, I probably do. I took a
special course in it when I was a kid, with a lot of other students who would
pick to take a certain course, and I did pretty well in that. It was one of the
few sciences I did do well, and I took a little bit of it in college, although
not very much. I suppose if I had gone into a science, that would have been the
one I would have gone into. So, that probably affected my topics for books. Were
you ever tempted to stay in academia and teach philosophy? Well, I was thinking
of doing that. That was why I was in grad school, but it became pretty obvious
after a while that there weren't going to be any jobs in the field, and that it
would have been years spent working towards the doctorate and then trying to
find a job and probably not being able to find one. I have serious doubts as to
whether I could have found any kind of permanent job or any kind of reasonable
job. I probably would have been one of those part-time migrating academics, and
that didn't exactly appeal to me, I have to admit. But I have thought of going
into it. There seems to be even less government support for the social sciences
now than there ever was And, of course, when you were in school, it wasn't all
that good anyway I would tend to think that's kind of an alarming trend Yes, it
is I mean, you know, in my case, I don't really feel that bad about it Looking
back at it, I don't suppose I ever would have been a terrific philosopher to
begin with I probably would have been second rate But as far as the people who
are really gifted in this kind of thing, I think it's probably a tragedy. And it
may take 10 or 20 years before people see it and suddenly realize that there's
no one around to teach certain things, that there's no one around to convey
certain kinds of knowledge and that something has been lost. So, that worries
me. Yeah. Okay, let's start talking about some specific works then. You started
out in print with short stories, which were later collected in Star Shadows.
Should beginning writers try to establish themselves by writing short stories
before they move on to something else? Well, that depends because one of the
advantages of a short story, obviously, for a beginning writer, is that you can
start it and finish it and have some immediate reinforcements. You're more
likely to be able to sit and sustain the effort to finish a short story, which
is hard enough to begin with. It's hard enough just to sit down and finish a
story, let alone sit and write a novel and not know what's going to happen and
then not know what to do with the thing after you've finished it, wondering if
anyone's even going to look at it, let alone buy it. And so in a practical
sense, it probably makes sense to start out with short stories. The trouble is,
not everybody is a short story writer. Some writers are basically novelists. If
they try to start out by writing short stories, they may find that somehow the
thing feels unfinished or that it's really not complete or that it's not really
what the particular writer wants to do. And in that case, I think, it might be
better off to try writing a novel, even if it is harder, just to finish it, just
to know that you can sit there and finish it. But once you finish the first one,
it doesn't guarantee you'll ever write another one, but it's a big step forward.
Just finish it, even if no one buys it. So I don't know. I think it depends on
the particular writer. I think if you have a particular short story gift,
obviously it would help to start out writing short stories. It means if you
present a book to an editor, you're not going to be a complete unknown. They
will have known that the writer has published something. But not everybody can
do it. and there are some writers who have just simply gone right into novel
writing to begin with. Ben has gone all right at that, and never wrote short
stories at all, or maybe wrote a couple after they had published novels.
In your short story collection, Star Shadows, there were ten stories, and by my
reckoning, which is not guaranteed to be correct, seven of the ten of them
involved relationships between couples, and the relationships range from pretty
abysmal ones to a pretty good one, like in If Ever I Should Leave You. This
isn't a theme that's usually presented in science fiction stories. Did you
consciously put that in there? Is that your reason for writing the stories, to
show such relationships? No, it really wasn't. It just turned out that way. It's
probably just because when I began to write a story or anything, I like to have
an idea of a particular character.
Usually the character begins... It sounds strange to put it this way, but
usually what happens is the character will begin to speak to me in some way.
I'll begin to get a sense of who this person is. As I find out more about the
character, it's as if the character is telling me about her life or his life,
what's going on in it, what kind of experiences they've had in their childhood
and so forth. And so if a relationship is in there, it may be, it's partly
because it may have something to do with the theme of the story also, may
reflect the theme of the story in some cases. But it's also simply because as I
write about a character, it's obvious that I'm going to be filling in certain
things about the character's life as I go along. I didn't consciously set out to
say, well, I am going to write about relationships and the relationships will
reflect the theme of the story or mirror it or whatever. I'm afraid I'm not that
conscious a writer. So it just turned out that way. If I write about couples or
relationships between couples, which I probably have a tendency to do, it's
because that's more familiar to me than a lot of other things. Obviously, if I
weren't part of a couple, then I probably would be writing more about single
people or about, you know, someone else. So that's probably it. The other
emotional theme that I saw in a lot of those stories was empathy, which is
harder to define and harder to write about, I would think. I assume it came up
for the same reason. Yeah. Yeah, I think it did.
One of the stories that really interested me in that collection was Gather Blue
Roses, which, again, if I'm right, it inspired at least two paperback covers. I
saw some blue roses on Star Shadows and then the one on Wandering Stars. You've
made some comments in forwards and things that you have trouble with titles, so
I'll ask you about that title. Where did Gather Blue Roses come from? Well, that
is a good question. I don't really know. I do know that it has it has something
to do with a particular symbol of trying to forget and trying to forget things
and obviously the color blue has quite a lot to do with sadness and with tragedy
which is what that story was about. It's a rather strange title for the story
probably but that's it, I got the title from someone else. I showed him the
story and said I don't have any kind of title for this. I had a title for it
when I started out, which was abysmal, but I had to put something at the top of
the page when I was writing it, so I put a god-awful title on the page and
showed it to another writer, and he was the one that gave me the title, so I
don't have to assign the credit elsewhere. Is it true that it is difficult to
think of the good catchy titles that editors like and that readers want to read?
Well, it probably isn't for some people, but it is for me. I sometimes wish that
there were a title writing workshop that I could go to so that I could come up
with titles It is a real agony for me That is the worst thing about a story for
me sometimes It's just coming up with a title Now I've been lucky with a few
I've written a few things for the title, naturally grew out of the story But
very often I don't have a title when I start I know that's strange because I've
heard people say that That they always have to have a title before they start or
they can't proceed. I almost never have a title when I start. But occasionally
I'm lucky and a few things have titles that are pretty obvious.
OK, I now have a trivia question. Three stories that appeared in a row, Gather
Blue Roses, Oasis, and Julio 204, all written in 1971, had a character named
Simon in them. Was this just coincidental? It probably was. It probably was
coincidental. I noticed it at the time myself, and about the only thing I can
say about that is that I don't think I was particularly fixated on the name, but
it just seemed that that was the name of that particular character. And the fact
that it occurred three times really is not important as far as I know. Maybe
somebody will do an analysis of it and find out that it is, but as far as I
know, it has no meaning.
The novel Cloned Lies is an expansion or a fusion of at least three short
stories that I could count. When you started writing the short stories, did you
have the idea in the back of your head to go ahead and do a novel eventually?
Not really. Not really. The stories – when I wrote the first story – maybe I
should start at the beginning. When I wrote the first story, I was writing more
of a particular anthology. Well, I wasn't really writing for this anthology, but
as I was writing this story, an editor told me he might be interested in this
particular story. I wrote that. It occurred to me a few months later that I
might want to use the same characters in another story, since I had become
interested in them when I wrote the first one, so I did that. And the whole
thing grew from there. I didn't intend for it to be a novel, which may be a flaw
in the book, for all I know. I originally thought of just writing a couple of
stories about these characters. Then I got more interested in them. Then I
thought maybe of writing a series of stories about them. And then the novel sort
of grew from that. I had to search for a structure for the novel, which was a
little difficult to do since I had been writing it in pieces, starting in the
middle, going to the beginning, moving towards the end. And to extract a
structure from that was a little difficult, But I wouldn't recommend it as a way
to write a novel. It may be a good way to write a first novel because at least I
finished the damn thing. If I had started out saying I was going to write the
book, I might never have gotten to the end. I might have been too intimidated by
the length.
As in many of your short stories, your depiction of the future in Cloned Lives
is pretty grim. Does this reflect your own personal feelings about what we're
doing now? Oh, I'm sure it does. I'm sure it does. I'm somewhat of a pessimist.
When the clones were born, I was surprised that they were spanked. I would have
thought that they would have been born by Le Boye method or something like that.
You know, now that I think of it, that probably would have been a better method
for them. I mean, given the fact that they were coming out of artificial wombs
in the first place, which was probably traumatic enough, for all I know, that
probably would have been a gentler method. And now that I think of it, that's
probably something, if I were writing it now, I might have done differently.
When I read it, I was particularly tuned in to Le Bois, and so that's kind of
picky, I got to admit. No, it really isn't picky. I don't suppose I really
thought very much about that and about that particular method, although it seems
to me it might actually have been difficult, because given the fact that they
were being born in a lab, given the fact that they were being born in a way that
human beings haven't been born, I'm not sure how you would apply Leboe to them.
There's no mother for them to rest against to speak of. Although I suppose that
maybe the people in the lab could have been a little gentler with them.
Okay, your knowledge of children and the dynamics of sibling interaction came
through pretty strongly in this book. Did you grow up with brothers and sisters
or have a lot of children around when you were growing up? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. I
did grow up with brothers and sisters, and my little brother and sister, I often
looked after my little brother and sister as a matter of fact. And I often
babysat, and I suppose that some of the ways in which the people in cloned lives
interact with each other are partly some of the ways in which my family
interacted. I mean, one of the things I noticed, not when I was growing up, but
sometime later, was that in a large family, I think everyone tends to stake out
his or her territory and each child sort of becomes an expert or takes over a
certain thing that's theirs and that's not the other kids. You know, sort of
distinguish yourselves from one another. And when I was writing about the
Swensons and Clone Wives, it didn't surprise me that they would try to do the
same thing. And as a matter of fact, I also had experience with twins because I
have cousins who are twins and there are twins in my family. So it's a natural
thing, I think. Well, more so now than it used to be, especially for identical
twins, to try to distinguish themselves from each other, to try to do things a
little differently so that each one sort of has his or her own identity. So
there is probably some of that experience in the book. I thought the most
ambitious part of the book was the multiple points of view that you took. Each
of the clones had a different characterization, and they were unique, and I
would think that would be pretty hard to pull off. Well, what's funny about that
is, I suppose it probably seems as though it would be hard, but consider this. I
was a beginning novelist then, hadn't written a book before. I knew that writing
from different points of view was certainly not something that a beginning
writer should probably tackle, but at the same time, I was writing about clones.
So I was reasoning this way. I thought, well, if the points of view seem
similar, I can't get called on that or criticized for that because, after all,
all the characters are clones of one another. So obviously there would be some
similarity. So I didn't have to worry quite as much as I might have if I were
writing from the point of view of completely different people who were
unrelated. I think that's a much more difficult sort of thing. The fact that
they were clones, I think, gave me a little more leeway there.
Again, I harp on this, and I will continue harping on this. This was a people
novel. You dealt primarily with the feelings of the clones, the isolation they
felt, how they felt different, that sort of thing. And that is different from
most science fiction that we read because it's generally the hardware that's
concentrated on by the authors now. Well, I think that's true of a certain kind
of science fiction, but I think there's always been science fiction that's
concentrated on the other things. Now, maybe my experience was a little
different, too, because the fact that I didn't start reading science fiction
until later meant that the sorts of things I did read tended to concentrate on
people more. And it was actually a surprise to me when I found out that there
were books that concentrated more on technology or engineering sorts of things.
And that just came as a surprise to me when I found out about it. I found out
about it rather late. So it never occurred to me that novels wouldn't be about
people. I just had no experience with that. So when I started writing, I think
it was a natural thing for me to start writing with that kind of attitude. I'd
always assumed that novels were essentially about people.
Well,
I think when I was writing CloneLives, I might have been a little more
pessimistic than I would be now. I mean, we've already seen test two babies. and
though the world has not exactly gone rushing to the barricades or demanding
that this be stopped or anything, most people don't really seem to think that
much about it. It seems reasonable to them that if someone can't have a child in
the normal way, that this kind of thing is really perfectly acceptable. Now, of
course, there's a big difference between that kind of thing and cloning. I think
cloning presents a great many more problems that this kind of thing doesn't
present. We haven't even gotten to the point of talking about artificial wombs
or any of this sort of stuff. And I think there are going to be a lot of
important issues to resolve. At the same time, I'm no longer quite so sure that
people are going to become completely hysterical about it or that it's
necessarily going to be bad or that it's necessarily going to damage us in some
way. Although I do think that as far as cloning in particular is concerned, and
I'm not sure there's really any constructive reason for bothering with it. I
can't think of too many reasons to clone anyone. And one of the things that I
tried to show in Clone Lives at least a little bit is that the notion of cloning
people thinking that they are going to be like the person they are cloned from
is really an illusion. They're going to be themselves. They won't have the same
experience. They won't grow up the same way. They won't have the same
environment. And that will create a certain kind of divergence.
I'll make a prediction. The only people that will be interested in cloning are
going to be the professional sports teams. Possibly. Although even there, you
can't be sure. You might clone someone. And, I mean, there are people who have
gone in for athletics very heavily and were very gifted at it, who, given other
circumstances, might have done something else, but just didn't have those
circumstances. Maybe for them sports was a way out of the ghetto or a way out of
poverty or a way to make a living or something that they loved, something that
they just had a real gift for. I'm not so sure that their children, even if they
were clones or exactly the same, would go in for sports in the same way. I don't
think that's at all obvious. Although, of course, if they were brought up with
that in mind, then you have another problem. Are you really giving the person
any choice? And what he becomes later on, if you deliberately clone someone,
bring him up to do a certain thing, you know, I think there are moral issues
there too. Not that that would stop big-time sports people from trying to clone
somebody, especially if they had enough money to throw around. Yeah, that seems
to be where all the money is these days. Yep. Okay, the novel The Sudden Star is
another expansion of a couple of short stories. Again, the same question, did
you have the novel in mind when you came up with the short stories? No, the
short story was just one short story. And then later on, I thought perhaps of
writing about some of the other characters in the book. But I had only written
one story when I sat down and tried to figure out what kind of novel I would do.
And so that was more... In that book, which was my second novel, I came a little
closer to actually planning a novel as a novel than I had in Clone Life. And...
Well, I don't really know what else to say about that. When I read Julio 204, I
got the idea that Simon Negron was a pretty rough, tough, callous customer. But
when I read The Sudden Star, especially toward the end of the book, he turned
out to be a little bit different than I would have anticipated. Did he grow as
you wrote the novel? Oh yes, I definitely think so. I definitely think so. And
also, well, of course, one of the other things with that character is, like a
lot of characters that I write about, I sometimes use as a starting point people
I know. Very often, that's how I'll start, although then the characters change.
And they are never exact duplicates of anyone I know by the time I finish a
book, because obviously they're going to be changed. The action of the book is
going to change them and so forth. But I did start out with a particular person
in mind whom I knew when I wrote about Simon Negron. And I suppose as I came to
know more about him, that was probably reflected in how he was portrayed in the
book also.
The principal scenes in that book took place in upstate New York and New York
City and Miami. Are you very familiar with the geography of all these places?
Because there was quite a realistic feeling. Well, I went to every place in the
book. Every place that's in the book, I went to. Because I don't like to write
about places I haven't been or things I haven't seen. Now, sometimes it's
unavoidable in science fiction, obviously, if you're going to write about the
moon or if you're going to write about another planet. But at least with the
solar system, there's more and more research being done that you can read about.
But as far as Earth goes, I like to visit places that I'm going to write about.
I feel much more comfortable doing that. And all of those places are places I've
seen.
I'm on the subway, unfortunately. The subway seemed to be breaking down in New
York a lot more quickly than I anticipated when I wrote The Sudden Star.
Do you have the location in mind where the farm was, that area, which part of
upstate New York that's around? I've thought of Pennsylvania more than upstate
New York. I think the farm was probably in Pennsylvania. I'm right near the
Pennsylvania border anyway. Okay. Okay. At what point in your writing did Mura
star, that idea of that symbolism come into existence? Well, I thought of that
at the beginning, and originally I had thought of an actual cosmic disaster
which had affected the Earth. And then I began to think that that really wasn't
what I was driving at in the book. I didn't want to talk about something that's
completely outside but destroys things. Because what has destroyed the earth in
that book? it's not anything outside of it or anything in the cosmos. It's the
people on earth itself who have destroyed it. And the Star is simply their
explanation because, you know, it's a way of evading the responsibility in a
sense. Having seen everything fall apart, people, I assumed, would look for
something to blame. And in this particular case, they blame this star, which
really has nothing to do with anything. It's just what's going to get the blame
for the situation.
Excuse me. That's okay. Go ahead. That's the hard thing about talking on a
phone. You don't get any signals here. Is The Sudden Star your title? Yes, it
is. Although in England, the publisher asked if they could change the title to
The White Death. because they didn't want it to sound like a science-fiction
book. So they thought The White Death, I guess, sounded more like a non-science
-fiction book. I didn't think that was worth arguing about, so I said that's
fine. And I suppose I could have called it The White Death, too, but I didn't. I
think The Seven Stars is much more appropriate. I think it probably is, too. I
think it probably is, too. Although what's interesting about the British
publisher picking that particular title is that one of the periods I had done
some research on before doing the Southern Star was the 13th century, and in the
14th century, I wanted to read about a period where everything was breaking
down, where society was beginning to collapse, and particularly the effects that
the Black Death had on Europe. And the reason I was doing that is because I was
dealing with another society later on that was breaking down in the Sudden Star,
and I wanted to have some sense of what that kind of thing was like historically
before I wrote about the future. And so I suppose in that sense it's appropriate
that they wanted to call it the White Death as opposed to the Black Death, but
but I think the Sudden Star is probably a more pertinent title. You had some
good characters at the end of the book, Paulette and Ildico. Are you planning to
do a sequel? Will we see these characters again? I'm not planning to do any
sequel because if one comes up, that's another matter. I suppose that one thing
about writing is that the characters have lives before you start writing the
book and then they have lives that go on after you finish the book. And I
suppose it's always possible to write each book from some other character's
point of view. And it's always possible to write about what happens to some of
the people after you've finished one book, too. But if that happens, it happens.
I haven't consciously thought of it. That would have to grow by itself, I think.
Okay, your novel Watch Star. That seemed to be a lot different from your other
books to me in that it was a much more visual book. There was a lot of, oh, the
cat juggling scene, the visions of the ancient city, the bones all blowing
around. And was this a new facet of your writing? Well, I'm not sure. I think
what was happening there is I was dealing with a character who, well, among
other things, she was different from other characters I'd written about in that
she was a member of an illiterate culture. She was a member of a culture that
had certain psychic powers. And I suppose that looking at things through her
eyes, which I had to do as I was writing it, it was a natural thing to see
things more visually.
The novel science fiction concept in that book was life on the comets, people
settling in the comets and living there. How did that occur to you? Well, that
was an idea I got from Freeman Dyson, who made the suggestion a few years ago
that you could get a comet and you could settle it and there are enough
materials on some of the large comets so that you could have life there. You
could perhaps grow big giant trees. He even talks about growing these big giant
trees and having these very green world. I loved that idea for one reason
because the one thing I didn't want to do is I didn't want to have my character
Gaia and make contact with this other civilization which is settled in the
comets and then go up there and wind up in one of these stainless steel
features. I just get so sick of those, or plastic features. You know, they seem
to be one or the other. You have the stainless steel ones that are very art
deco, and then you have the plastic ones where everybody has tiny micro
-miniaturized things and weird sorts of decor that looked like the inside of
McDonald's or something. And I didn't want to write about that kind of future
society. I wanted to have something a little different. And in fact, what I
wound up with was having a comet society, which is very much like living in a
garden or living in a jungle or living in a natural environment in a way, even
though it's a very unnaturally created environment. It just appealed to me more
than writing about the other kind of future, I suppose, or the other kind of
future, possible future world. With all the clone novels and the stories that
we've seen, nobody has ever expressed the fear of what you did when Dye was
talking. Is it Raiho? That's how I pronounced his name. And the Tay, after he
had died, and she was saying that they would implant another memory in his body,
and Daya was arguing that that wouldn't be Reho. It has his memories, but his
soul is gone. He's gone. And I'd never seen anybody write that, although that
had occurred to me, that the essence or whatever of the person would be gone.
And I was glad to see that discussed for a change. Yes, I mean, you can call it
a soul if you want, or you could call it simply the memories and the essence, I
suppose, or whatever is in the person. The fact of the matter is if you take any
body, I think, and strip it completely of its memories, its experiences, and so
on, even if you plant something in there that takes place, that has all the
memories, now everyone else will treat the person exactly the same way. There
won't be any difference probably as far as they're concerned. The person will be
the same to them. But it's not the same person. I think that's probably obvious.
I don't know. I know that it's a lot more popular to assume that it would be the
same person, but it wouldn't be the same person. I just don't think so. So Ryho
really is dead as far as I'm concerned. The character who went through that book
by that time is actually gone, even though there will be another rival who will
go about his business, who will have all his memories, and so on. Now, some
people who have written about matter transmitters have talked about this, too.
If you send somebody through a matter transmitter, which is another sort of
problem also, and you have somebody at the other end who's just duplicated from
the pattern, is that really the person, or has the person died and another
person been created to take his place?
Yeah, Captain Kirk was gone in the first episode, I guess.
Okay, the Golden Space that had shades of cloned lives in that it was about a
group of concerned a group of children that were different and perceived
themselves as different. Did this kind of idea occur to you when you were doing
Coled Lives, or did the embryonic stages of it hit you then? No, actually what
happened with that story is it's unusual in one sense, because usually I write
stories without regard to where I'm going to sell them until after I finish
them. In this particular case, Jack Dan was doing an anthology. He was doing it
on the theme of immortality. He had asked several writers for stories for the
book. He wanted long stories. And so I thought about the topic and I said, well,
immortality, I don't know if there's really anything to write about immortality.
I really didn't think there was. It just didn't seem that interesting to me. And
after I thought about it for a while, I finally decided maybe I would try
writing a long story about it. But I was more interested not even in the
immortality theme, but in the theme of what would you do if you were immortal,
and that was already a given. And you were beginning to get tired of things, and
what kind of children might you raise, and so on and so forth. I didn't really
think of it as an outgrowth of clone lives at all, although I suppose some of
the same concerns must have been there, and I must have been sort of chewing
them over in my mind without really realizing it. And so I wrote the first part
of the Golden Space, The Renewal, as a short novel for this anthology. Sort of
stimulated me to think about the subject a little bit. And I figured that would
be the end of that, too. I guess it was another situation like Carl Lund. I
thought, well, that's that. I've written that short novel, and I probably won't
have anything more to say about this. But later on, I found other things I
wanted to write. The Summer's Dust section, I originally didn't write as a part
of that book at all, either. That's another thing. Even though it became part of
the book, I wrote that as a separate story. and I knew it was dealing with the
same world, but I just thought it was going to be a separate story and not part
of the novel. But later on, I decided to incorporate it since I wanted to use
one of the characters later on.
Okay, you just answered my next question. Okay, the heart of the novel is
immortality, and then with aging and growing old, that sort of thing thrown in,
I would think that this is where your philosophical background would have really
been helpful as opposed to those that don't have that kind of background to
think about these sorts of things. Well, I don't know. Well, in the case of
immortality, I'm not so sure because that has been such a popular thing for
people to think about since probably forever. I mean, people have always been
thinking about that. There have always been stories about people who were
immortal or thought for immortality or whatever. The thing is what to do when
you actually have that is another problem. Maybe there had something to do with
it.
In the latter stages of the book, the character Domingo is explaining to the
people that he's captured or is treating to its hospitality. He's talking about
his village and he's talking about the people in his village, that they have
divided minds and that their minds talk in voices to each other. So immediately
to my mind came this book by Julian Jaynes called The Origin of Conscious and
the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind. Oh yes. Oh yes, yes. I definitely
incorporated that book. I had read that book a couple of years earlier and I I
drew on it for some of the inspiration, although I'm a little dubious about some
things in that book, although it can still be useful for a novel, even though
I'm somewhat dubious about, not necessarily about theory itself, but about his
notion that people as recently as 3,000 years ago might have been in that state.
That I consider more dubious, and I found his analysis
of the Iliad somewhat unconvincing. I don't even know if he knows Greek. I found
it a very, very strange thing, and I don't know any classicists who would buy
that part of the argument at all.
But as an idea, it's very intriguing. It does have the virtue of explaining a
lot of things that would otherwise be unexplainable. And for the purpose of this
book, I thought maybe I would do a little bit using it.
I'm glad I mentioned that book because I've never had any feedback from anybody
else that read it, and I thought it was a neat theory. I don't believe it, but
it sure sounds nice, and I was glad to see it in your book. I thought that might
have been where it came from or that helped it. I don't know if I have enough
originality to think of it all by myself.
Okay, now I have another sort of trivia question. Since I read, either for the
first time, or re-read all your works together in a pretty short period of time,
one thing I couldn't help noticing, I started counting them, and about 29 people
in the books that you've published have red hair. and I was just going to make
that comment and see if that was something conscious or something... I'm sure
that's not conscious except, well, I mean, I have had red-haired friends, of
course and I have known many people with red hair whether or not, well, I
suppose I could always do an analysis and say how many people have red hair how
many people have blonde hair how many people have black hair how many people are
Caucasian how many people are black and so forth If I did a whole list of these
things, I don't know if they would reflect their proportions in the population
or not. And I don't know if it really matters. I don't know if I have more
redheads in there than are in the population as a whole. Maybe I do. No, I just
had to ask that. I noticed it, and I didn't know if there was some secret signal
there. I didn't know there were that many.
Okay, I kind of want to switch tracks here. You are better known in some circles
as an editor and an anthologist. I think that's something that science fiction
fans know very little about. So could you give us kind of a cradle-to-grave
description of how one goes about editing a book from the idea to getting the
people to do it for you? Do you think we ought to change tapes? Ask her how long
this answer is going to be. Okay. Will this be a long answer or a short answer?
Oh, well, maybe you better change... Let's change tapes, yeah. We've got about
five, three minutes worth of tape. Okay, hang on. Tape's being changed. Okay,
tape's being...